Add jupyterlab stuff & other small updates (#5575)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/dev/tutorials/interactive-tools/tutorial.md

## The Dockerfile

> If you need some help to start your Dockerfile you can always some inspiration from the previous interactve tools build in Galaxy. Go check some of the Dockerfiles for instance the one for the application [QGIS](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/docker-qgis) or for [ODV](https://github.com/bgruening/docker-odv/tree/main)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need some help to start your Dockerfile you can always get some inspiration from the previous interactive tools built in Galaxy. Go check some of the Dockerfiles, for instance the one for the [QGIS](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/docker-qgis) application or for [ODV](https://github.com/bgruening/docker-odv/tree/main).
```

```sh
$__tool_directory__
$__root_dir__
$__user_id__
$__user_email__
```

It can also be useful to create and inject environment variables into the tool context. This can be acheived using the `<environment variables>` tag in the tool XML. The [RStudio GxIT](https://github.com/galaxyproject/galaxy/blob/b180b7909dc3fe2750fbc8b90214e201eb276794/tools/interactive/interactivetool_rstudio.xml#L12) again provides an example of this:

```xml
<environment_variables>
    <environment_variable name="HISTORY_ID" strip="True">${__app__.security.encode_id($jupyter_notebook.history_id)}</environment_variable>
    <environment_variable name="REMOTE_HOST">${__app__.config.galaxy_infrastructure_url}</environment_variable>
    <environment_variable name="GALAXY_WEB_PORT">8080</environment_variable>
    <environment_variable name="GALAXY_URL">$__galaxy_url__</environment_variable>
    <environment_variable name="DEBUG">true</environment_variable>
    <environment_variable name="DISABLE_AUTH">true</environment_variable>
    <environment_variable name="API_KEY" inject="api_key" />
</environment_variables>
```

> ## Galaxy history interaction
> We have demonstrated how to pass an input file to the Docker container. But what if the application needs to interact with the user's Galaxy history? For example, if the user creates a file within the application. That's where the environment variables created in the tool XML become useful.
> 
> > <tip-title>Access histories in R</tip-title>
> > From the [R-Studio GxIT](https://github.com/galaxyproject/galaxy/blob/dev/tools/interactive/interactivetool_rstudio.xml) we can see that there is [an R library](https://github.com/hexylena/rGalaxyConnector) that allows us to interact with Galaxy histories.
> >
> > "The convenience functions `gx_put()` and `gx_get()` are available to you to interact with your current Galaxy history. You can save your workspace with `gx_save()`"
> >
> > Under the hood, this library uses [galaxy_ie_helpers](https://github.com/bgruening/galaxy_ie_helpers) - a Python interface to Galaxy histories written with [BioBlend](https://github.com/galaxyproject/bioblend). You could also use BioBlend directly (or even the Galaxy REST API) if your GxIT requires a more flexible interface than these wrappers provide.
> >

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Galaxy history interaction

We have demonstrated how to pass an input file to the Docker container. But what if the application needs to interact with the user's Galaxy history? For example, if the user creates a file within the application. That's where the environment variables created in the tool XML become useful.

> <tip-title>Access histories in R</tip-title>
> From the [R-Studio GxIT](https://github.com/galaxyproject/galaxy/blob/dev/tools/interactive/interactivetool_rstudio.xml) we can see that there is [an R library](https://github.com/hexylena/rGalaxyConnector) that allows us to interact with Galaxy histories.
>
> "The convenience functions `gx_put()` and `gx_get()` are available to you to interact with your current Galaxy history. You can save your workspace with `gx_save()`"
>
> Under the hood, this library uses [galaxy_ie_helpers](https://github.com/bgruening/galaxy_ie_helpers) - a Python interface to Galaxy histories written with [BioBlend](https://github.com/galaxyproject/bioblend). You could also use BioBlend directly (or even the Galaxy REST API) if your GxIT requires a more flexible interface than these wrappers provide.
>
```

{: .tip}

</div>

> <div class="Jupyterlab" markdown="1">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<div class="JupyterLab" markdown="1">
```

or just lowercase ...

# The jupyterlab

> The jupyterlab environement that we will wrap in this tutorial is a simple jupyterlab tool which
> allows the user to upload data in an jupyter environment, manipulate notebooks, and download
> outputs. 
> 
> Our example jupyterlab can already be found [online](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/docker-copernicus-notebooks) 
> But you can also check an other implementation of [jupyterlabs](https://github.com/bgruening/docker-jupyter-notebook/blob/master/Dockerfile).
> In the following sections, we will study how it can be built into a GxIT.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The JupyterLab environment that we will wrap in this tutorial is a simple JupyterLab tool which
allows the user to upload data in a Jupyter environment, manipulate notebooks, and download
outputs. 

Our example JupyterLab can already be found [online](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/docker-copernicus-notebooks) 
But you can also check another implementation of [JupyterLabs](https://github.com/bgruening/docker-jupyter-notebook/blob/master/Dockerfile).
In the following sections, we will study how it can be built into a GxIT.

```

> <hands-on-title></hands-on-title>
>

> > First, let's clone the repository to take a quick look at a basic implementation of a jupyterlab.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> First, let's clone the repository to take a quick look at a basic implementation of a JupyterLab.
```

>
> ```console
> $ git clone https://github.com/bgruening/docker-jupyter-notebook.git
> $ cd docker-jupyter-notebook
>
> $ tree .
> ├── Dockerfile
> ├── LICENSE
> ├── README.md
> ├── .
> ├── .
> ├── .
> └── startup.sh
> ```

> > You'll find a Dockerfile, startup.sh, and a README that will describe how the dockerfile here for an Gxit works. We encourage you to read thi README.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> You'll find a Dockerfile, startup.sh, and a README that will describe how the Dockerfile here for a GxIT works. We encourage you to read this README.
```

>
{: .hands_on}

## The Dockerfile

> If you need some help to start your Dockerfile you can always some inspiration from the previous interactve tools build in Galaxy. Go check some of the Dockerfiles for instance the one for the [Copernicus data sapce ecosystem jupyterlab](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/docker-copernicus-notebooks/blob/main/Dockerfile) or for a basic [jupyterlab here](https://github.com/bgruening/docker-jupyter-notebook/blob/master/Dockerfile)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you need some help to start your Dockerfile you can always some inspiration from the previous interactive tools built in Galaxy. Go check some of the Dockerfiles, for instance, the one for the [Copernicus data space ecosystem JupyterLab](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/docker-copernicus-notebooks/blob/main/Dockerfile) or for a basic [JupyterLab here](https://github.com/bgruening/docker-jupyter-notebook/blob/master/Dockerfile)
```

> <tip-title>A brief primer on Docker</tip-title>
> Docker allows an entire application context to be containerized. A typical web application consists of an operating system, installed dependancies, web server configuration, database configuration and, of course, the codebase of the software itself. A Docker container can encapsulate all of these components in a single "image", which can be run on any machine with Docker installed.
>
> **Essentials of Docker:**
>
> 1. Write an image recipe as a Dockerfile. This single file selects an OS, installs software, pulls code repositories and copies files from the host machine (your computer).
> 2. Build the image from your recipe:
>
>    `docker build -t <image_name> .`
> 3. View existing images with
>
>    `docker image list`
> 4. Run a container with a specified command:
>
>    `docker run <image_name> <command>`
> 5. View running containers:
>
>    `docker ps`
> 6. Stop a running container:
>
>    `docker stop <container_name>`
> 7. Remove a stopped container:
>
>    `docker container rm <container_name>`
> 8. Remove an image:
>
>    `docker image rm <container_name>`
{: .tip}

> Let's check out [the Dockerfile](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/docker-copernicus-notebooks/blob/main/Dockerfile) that we'll use to containerize our Jupyterlab.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's check out [the Dockerfile](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/docker-copernicus-notebooks/blob/main/Dockerfile) that we'll use to containerize our JupyterLab.
```

container registry in the cloud, ready for consumption by our Galaxy instance:

```dockerfile
# Jupyter container used for Galaxy copernicus notebooks (+other kernels) Integration

# from 5th March 2021
FROM jupyter/datascience-notebook:python-3.10

MAINTAINER Björn A. Grüning, bjoern.gruening@gmail.com

ENV DEBIAN_FRONTEND noninteractive
USER root

RUN apt-get -qq update && \
    apt-get install -y wget unzip net-tools procps && \
    apt-get autoremove -y && \
    apt-get clean && \
    rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/* /tmp/* /var/tmp/*

# Set channels to (defaults) > bioconda > conda-forge
RUN conda config --add channels conda-forge && \
    conda config --add channels bioconda
    #conda config --add channels defaults
RUN pip install --upgrade pip
RUN pip install --no-cache-dir bioblend galaxy-ie-helpers

ENV JUPYTER /opt/conda/bin/jupyter
ENV PYTHON /opt/conda/bin/python
ENV LD_LIBRARY_PATH /opt/conda/lib/

# Python packages
RUN conda config --add channels conda-forge && \
    conda config --add channels bioconda && \
    conda install --yes --quiet \
    bash_kernel \
    ansible-kernel \
    bioblend galaxy-ie-helpers \
```

> With those packages installed you have the bases to have a functionnal environement in your jupyterlab AND be able to link your jupyterlab to the Galaxy history with the pacakage `bioblend galaxy-ie-helpers`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With those packages installed, you have the bases to have a functional environment in your JupyterLab AND be able to link your JupyterLab to the Galaxy history with the package `bioblend galaxy-ie-helpers`.
```

Reviewer 2: the package is galaxy-ie-helpers, it uses under the hood bioblend, but I guess we can ignore this here

> Then you can add the package specific to the environement you want to have in you jupyterlab for instance 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then you can add the package specific to the environment you want to have in your JupyterLab for instance 
```

```
    # specific sentinel, openeo packages
    sentinelhub \
    openeo \
    # other packages for notebooks
    geopandas \
    rasterio \
    ipyleaflet \
    netcdf4 \
    h5netcdf \
    # Jupyter widgets
    jupytext && \
    conda clean -yt && \
    pip install jupyterlab_hdf \
    fusets

```

> Then, you can add some configurations to have some configuration and a welcome notebook by default (this generic to all jupyterlabs gxit)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, you can add some configurations to have some configuration and a welcome notebook by default (this is generic to all JupyterLab GxITs)
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe not "then" but "Now, ..."?

```
ADD ./startup.sh /startup.sh
ADD ./get_notebook.py /get_notebook.py

# We can get away with just creating this single file and Jupyter will create the rest of the
# profile for us.
RUN mkdir -p /home/$NB_USER/.ipython/profile_default/startup/ && \
    mkdir -p /home/$NB_USER/.jupyter/custom/

COPY ./ipython-profile.py /home/$NB_USER/.ipython/profile_default/startup/00-load.py
COPY jupyter_notebook_config.py /home/$NB_USER/.jupyter/
COPY jupyter_lab_config.py /home/$NB_USER/.jupyter/

ADD ./custom.js /home/$NB_USER/.jupyter/custom/custom.js
ADD ./custom.css /home/$NB_USER/.jupyter/custom/custom.css
ADD ./default_notebook.ipynb /home/$NB_USER/notebook.ipynb

```

> You can also add your own set of notebooks to guide the user like that :

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also add your own set of notebooks to guide the user like that:
```

```
# Download notebooks
RUN cd /home/$NB_USER/ &&  \
    wget -O notebook-samples.zip https://github.com/eu-cdse/notebook-samples/archive/refs/heads/main.zip && \
    unzip notebook-samples.zip && \
    rm /home/$NB_USER/notebook-samples.zip && \
    mv /home/$NB_USER/notebook-samples-main/geo /home/$NB_USER && \
    mv /home/$NB_USER/notebook-samples-main/sentinelhub /home/$NB_USER && \
    mv /home/$NB_USER/notebook-samples-main/openeo /home/$NB_USER && \
    rm -r /home/$NB_USER/notebook-samples-main
```

> Finally, some general variables of environment :

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, some general variables of environment:
```

>
> 2. Now let's use the recipe to build our Docker image.
>
>    ```sh
>    # Build a container image from our Dockerfile
>    IMAGE_TAG="myimage"
>    LOG_PATH=`pwd`  # Create log output in current directory
>    PORT=8765
>    docker build -t $IMAGE_TAG --build-arg LOG_PATH=$LOG_PATH --build-arg PORT=$PORT .
>    ```
>
>    > <tip-title>Automating the build</tip-title>
>    > While developing the Docker container you may find yourself tweaking and rebuilding the container image many times.
>    > In the GitHub repository linked above, you'll notice that the author has used a `Makefile` to accelerate the build and deploy process.
>    > This allows the developer to simply run `make docker` and `make push_hub` to build and push the container, or `make` to rebuild the container after making changes during development. Check out the `Makefile` to see what commands can be run using `make` in this repository.
>    >
>    {: .tip}
{: .hands_on}

If you are lucky, you might find an available Docker image for the application you are trying to wrap. However, existing Docker images often require some "tweaking" before they will work as a GxIT. Some example configuration changes are:

> 1. Expose the correct port. The application, Docker and tool XML ports must be aligned!

Reviewer 2: Not sure if this is really needed to be honest.

Author: Which part ? thepart on tweaking the Docker image or the ports ?

Reviewer 2: Tweaking the docker image.

Author: Better ?

2. Log output to an external file - useful for debugging.
3. Make the application callable from tool `<command>` - this sometimes requires a wrapper script to interface the application inside the container (we'll take a look at this later).

## Test the image

> Before we go pushing our container to the cloud, we should give it a local test run to ensure that it's working correctly on our development machine. Have a play and see how our little web app works!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before we push our container to the cloud, we should give it a local test run to ensure that it's working correctly on our development machine. Have a play and see how our little web app `works!`
```

> <tip-title>Access histories in R</tip-title>
> From the [R-Studio GxIT](https://github.com/galaxyproject/galaxy/blob/dev/tools/interactive/interactivetool_rstudio.xml) we can see that there is [an R library](https://github.com/hexylena/rGalaxyConnector) that allows us to interact with Galaxy histories.
>
> "The convenience functions `gx_put()` and `gx_get()` are available to you to interact with your current Galaxy history. You can save your workspace with `gx_save()`"
>
> Under the hood, this library uses [galaxy_ie_helpers](https://github.com/bgruening/galaxy_ie_helpers) - a Python interface to Galaxy histories written with [BioBlend](https://github.com/galaxyproject/bioblend). You could also use BioBlend directly (or even the Galaxy REST API) if your GxIT requires a more flexible interface than these wrappers provide.
>
{: .tip}

</div>

<div class="JupyterLab" markdown="1">

# The JupyterLab

The JupyterLab environment that we will wrap in this tutorial is a simple JupyterLab tool which
allows the user to upload data in a Jupyter environment, manipulate notebooks, and download
outputs. 

> Our example JupyterLab can already be found [online](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/docker-copernicus-notebooks) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our example JupyterLab can already be found [online](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/docker-copernicus-notebooks) .
```

But you can also check another implementation of [JupyterLabs](https://github.com/bgruening/docker-jupyter-notebook/blob/master/Dockerfile).
In the following sections, we will study how it can be built into a GxIT.

> <hands-on-title></hands-on-title>
>
> First, let's clone the repository to take a quick look at a basic implementation of a JupyterLab.
>
> ```console
> $ git clone https://github.com/bgruening/docker-jupyter-notebook.git
> $ cd docker-jupyter-notebook
>
> $ tree .
> ├── Dockerfile
> ├── LICENSE
> ├── README.md
> ├── .
> ├── .
> ├── .
> └── startup.sh
> ```
> You'll find a Dockerfile, startup.sh, and a README that will describe how the Dockerfile here for a GxIT works. We encourage you to read this README.
>
{: .hands_on}

## The Dockerfile

> If you need some help to start your Dockerfile you can always some inspiration from the previous interactive tools built in Galaxy. Go check some of the Dockerfiles, for instance, the one for the [Copernicus data space ecosystem JupyterLab](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/docker-copernicus-notebooks/blob/main/Dockerfile) or for a basic [JupyterLab here](https://github.com/bgruening/docker-jupyter-notebook/blob/master/Dockerfile)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need some help to start your Dockerfile you can always get some inspiration from the previous interactive tools built in Galaxy. Go check some of the Dockerfiles, for instance, the one for the [Copernicus data space ecosystem JupyterLab](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/docker-copernicus-notebooks/blob/main/Dockerfile) or for a basic [JupyterLab here](https://github.com/bgruening/docker-jupyter-notebook/blob/master/Dockerfile).
```

RUN conda config --add channels conda-forge && \
    conda config --add channels bioconda
    #conda config --add channels defaults
RUN pip install --upgrade pip
RUN pip install --no-cache-dir bioblend galaxy-ie-helpers

ENV JUPYTER /opt/conda/bin/jupyter
ENV PYTHON /opt/conda/bin/python
ENV LD_LIBRARY_PATH /opt/conda/lib/

# Python packages
RUN conda config --add channels conda-forge && \
    conda config --add channels bioconda && \
    conda install --yes --quiet \
    bash_kernel \
    ansible-kernel \
    bioblend galaxy-ie-helpers \
```
With those packages installed, you have the bases to have a functional environment in your JupyterLab AND be able to link your JupyterLab to the Galaxy history with the package `bioblend galaxy-ie-helpers`.

Then you can add the package specific to the environment you want to have in your JupyterLab for instance 

```
    # specific sentinel, openeo packages
    sentinelhub \
    openeo \
    # other packages for notebooks
    geopandas \
    rasterio \
    ipyleaflet \
    netcdf4 \
    h5netcdf \
    # Jupyter widgets
    jupytext && \
    conda clean -yt && \
    pip install jupyterlab_hdf \
    fusets

```

> Then, you can add some configurations to have some configuration and a welcome notebook by default (this is generic to all JupyterLab GxITs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, you can add some configurations to have some configuration and a welcome notebook by default (this is generic to all JupyterLab GxITs).
```

ADD ./custom.js /home/$NB_USER/.jupyter/custom/custom.js
ADD ./custom.css /home/$NB_USER/.jupyter/custom/custom.css
ADD ./default_notebook.ipynb /home/$NB_USER/notebook.ipynb

```

You can also add your own set of notebooks to guide the user like that:

```
# Download notebooks
RUN cd /home/$NB_USER/ &&  \
    wget -O notebook-samples.zip https://github.com/eu-cdse/notebook-samples/archive/refs/heads/main.zip && \
    unzip notebook-samples.zip && \
    rm /home/$NB_USER/notebook-samples.zip && \
    mv /home/$NB_USER/notebook-samples-main/geo /home/$NB_USER && \
    mv /home/$NB_USER/notebook-samples-main/sentinelhub /home/$NB_USER && \
    mv /home/$NB_USER/notebook-samples-main/openeo /home/$NB_USER && \
    rm -r /home/$NB_USER/notebook-samples-main
```

Finally, some general variables of environment:

```
# ENV variables to replace conf file
ENV DEBUG=false \
    GALAXY_WEB_PORT=10000 \
    NOTEBOOK_PASSWORD=none \
    CORS_ORIGIN=none \
    DOCKER_PORT=none \
    API_KEY=none \
    HISTORY_ID=none \
    REMOTE_HOST=none \
    GALAXY_URL=none

# @jupyterlab/google-drive  not yet supported

USER root
WORKDIR /import

# Start Jupyter Notebook
CMD /startup.sh

```

> And with all this your Dockerfile is ready 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And with all this your Dockerfile is ready.
```

> You now need to publish this image o a public repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You now need to publish this image on a public repository.
```
